Motion, a seemingly new art form of design, is actually a crucial part of today’s design spectrum . Take the Material Design language — motion is a huge chapter and visibly plays an important role in the material aesthetics. Much to our delight, we’ve seen designers on MaterialUp embrace it and create excellent examples every day. So we ought to explore this art a little further. Shall we?Meet Yaroslav Zubko, a designer from Ukraine whose craft and signature motion design intrigues many! We chatted to learn more about his toolset, techniques and mindset. Lucky for us all, he’s very open about his design process and shared a whole lot of good tips and references to create great Motion Design. Enjoy!Even though occasionally I still use photoshop and illustrator, my main tool set includes:I have a bunch of plugins installed and tested by time in my Sketch. Among those: Distributor, Font Awesome, Select Layers with the Same, Sketch Palettes, Craft (of course), Zeplin and Runner ⤵In the company I work for, there is “Design Thinking” or “Design First” approach we apply to our projects. It’s at some point similar to Google’s “Design Sprint” but we have different methodologies based on our enterprise projects.Whatever project size is, it all might be broken into a few general steps:1. Define what it’s going to be — whether that is a huge project and I need to start with figuring user and business needs or just a small dribbble animation resolving some navigation issue, first step would be to understand and define what that issue is. If it’s an existing project (or issue), that’s the stage where I research it.What might come out of this stage:2. Start off broad and narrow down along the way — when I have enough understanding of the problem I can start sketching up some ideas in representation of a rough wireframes. Those might be some parts of the interface, or pieces of the workflow, or still slides showing user’s journey when using the app. For me it’s often (although not always) paper first. Like I mentioned im not any good at drawing so my sketches are pretty ugly, although they do the job — explore as many ideas for the shortest time as possible. At this stage, it’s quantity before quality.This stage is over when I have a clear idea what to animate, prototype in more details (big projects) or to start working on architecture (bigger projects). So basically, throughout this stage I just run through as many ideas as possible, some of them stay on paper, some don’t, some don’t even get a second thought coz they are pretty stupid as I see them, but they still do their prior job — leading me to a better ones.From first sketches... to final prototypes:3. Get the idea into pixels — when the solution is chosen among others, it’s ready to be digitized. Depending on a project size, different tools come handy at this point.If project is big it might be Mindmap or Draw.io. If architecture is clear and I can skip building it up, I jump to more detailed prototyping using Balsamiq or just the Sketch right away. So I don’t start animating till I have at least a decision on the layout.The second and the third stages reiterate till all open questions are tested and validated with the users, approved with customers or, if it’s one of my personal shots, till I’m just satisfied with the result myself. But even so, I guess I validate it with the audience on Dribbble and UpLabs by receiving a valuable feedback afterwards, and for this opportunity I’m very grateful to you guys by the way.Process deliverables from my another project:I’m not sure I can call these techniques but i’ll try to share some thoughts on the topic:1. I’d say, it’s all about coming up with the right solution. So in order to relatively succeed at that, I often need go through many possible options to find a better one. When I have a user need to fulfill and ideas are stuffing my head, it’s productive to lay them on paper quickly so I catch as many as possible till they are gone.2. For me, there’s always a reasonable stop to being a perfectionist.There are tons of factors that take place like a person’s mood, what they’ve heard about this object, how it helps them solve their own problems, how you present, even the weather outside and the lighting in the room. All of that matters, so sometimes I just ask myself a question “Would I compete with all those factors using 800*600 resolution!?”…I can try but if it takes too much time, I know I better just drop it and move to the next thing. There’s something more valuable than a “perfection”, this is an education and learning at every step I take.3. My most productive time for creativity is in the morning so usually I try to start working in a period of time from 6:30 am to 9 am. That’s a time where all the communicators get switched off and everything is exclusively for my brain’s activity.4. I like to design following the material approach, and it’s all about natural movements and views of objects. Sometimes I just notice objects on the street that throw a shadow, move or just look. I hope that doesn’t sound too strange but you just try to take a look at commercial billboard on a wall of the supermarket at about 8am (when the sun is still low and shadows are blurred) and you’ll know what I’m talking about. So I just try to reflect all of that in my design.Also, there are no sharp corners on the street so even if I don’t want to highlight rounded corners too much in my design, usually I prefer to round those corners for 1–2px so it looks more natural and kind of friendly. Unless, of course, the whole thing of the design is about sharp corners and colors:)Sometimes I also use barely noticeable gradients to make the controls pop-out and make user “want” to click it :)5. I don’t like (understatement) to use ready-made icons. So in my designs I usually go “pixel perfect” on those.6. Also, in my animations I try to sustain people’s attention. In order to do that I may spend a while adjusting a proper speed, catchy colors, the movement of elements etc. Even if it’s a UX problem, I try to include some aspect of entertainment. And, of course, it’s always looped up :)7. Speaking technical, I love hot keys. When I started learning After Effects I printed and hung a shortcut lists over my workplace so I’d memorize them faster.This particular shot is a part of an “Interaction Library”, which is one of the reasons I wanted to create it in the first place. You can find out more about it in the description for this animation.My second reason was that the issue of filtering through complex tables on mobile has existed for a long time now. As I faced it myself in one of my projects, I decided to give it more thoughts.1.Paper — to sketch up the idea and workflow I was going to animate.2.Sketch > to find a proper colours, decide on spacing and see how it correlates with other pieces of the “Interaction Library”.As you can see it stores some pieces of “Interaction Library” along with some of the future ideas. That where I tried to incorporate this shot to the big picture in terms of colors, spacing and content.3.Principle > most of the work was done here.4.Photoshop > even though sometime PS can play really funny tricks with saving your gifs, it’s still the best tool I know for converting .mov into .gif. It also has pretty vide variety of options for tweaking it.5.Ezgif.com > this amazing tool might reduce your gif size dramatically. You can see below what optimisation method I used for this particular design.Firstly books, among others the most influence had:Secondly, of course, internet resources are my every day tool for staying tuned. Aside from all the social networks, I also follow amazing services like Medium, UXPin, uxdesign.cc, UX Mastery, UX for the masses, Creative Bloq.And lastly, considering that I work in the global company where they have about 40 other designers, I get lots of related information from our internal channels in Slack, Skype or just from people sitting right next to me.Thank you for the interview, I hope that was any valuable.And if you have any additional questions left, you can contact me at any social profile and i’ll gladly answer those :)More about YaroslavMy name is Yaroslav. Originally I’m from a small city called Kaniv, located in the middle of Ukraine. I’ve been based in the capital of Ukraine, Kiev, for the last 10 years for now. I work as a designer at an international company called SoftServe and have some occasional side work as well.Given that I graduated law school (that was my main education), I can call myself pretty much self taught designer. I’m sure, it is one of the best types of education one can get :) After graduation I didn’t want to work as a lawyer, felt just wrong for me. So I tried to remember what I liked to do when I was a kid and here we go, back then I was really into coming up with ideas and laying them out on paper. Transformed to modern demand and job market, I knew exactly what I needed to become.Follow Yaroslav on UpLabs, Twitter and Dribbble.The best of UI Design for professionals https://www.uplabs.com/Our publication is for designers, developers and product leads to explore the whole creative process, from concept to implementation. Now we’re going to learn about the key features in Principle, which define a new approach to prototyping and keep the process linear. This half of the crash course contains more hands-on learning and a deeper look into what makes Principle the Sketch of prototyping tool.Grab some snacks and open up Principle. Each section includes one to two exercises for you to tinker with.Everything you need for this crash course is already packaged into each exercise file, including these design elements:We are starting with the most simple task — how to make buttons work. Anytime you select an object in Principle, you will see a lightning bolt icon, click on it, then drag from the trigger you want (the speech bubble will disappear) to the designated artboard. In the pop-up menu, you can see that Principle can handle many types of triggers.Step 1: Select the yellow button shape (you can bypass groups containing the element by holding down ⌘cmd when you click on the button)Step 2: Hit lightning bolt icon. Drag from “Tap” option to second artboard. Second artboard should light up in purple color. Release.Step 3: Test button in Preview window.Step 4: In second artboard, select “Logo” layer in “Header” to return prototype to first artboard.Step 5: Hit lightning bolt icon and use “Tap” again but drag to first artboard this time.Step 1: Select “Tab-02”Step 2: Hit lightning bolt icon. Drag from “Tap” option to artboard itself. Release. You will see a second artboard produced.Step 3: Open up “Fill” dropdown in Inspector and exchange the color of the two tabs, so “Tab-02” appear active while “Tab-01” is inactive.Step 4: Decrease opacity of “Tab-page-1” to 0% in second artboard.Step 5: Now we will create a backdoor pathway for user to go back. Select “Tab-01” in second artboard. Hit lightning bolt icon. Drag from “Tap” to first artboard.Step 1: Select “HamburgerIcon-Group”Step 2: Hit lighting bolt icon for “Tap” and then drag to the current artboard to duplicate for a second artboard.Step 3: Go to second artboard, position “Menu-BG” to fit screen.Step 4: Select “HamburgerIcon-Group”, but this time in second artboard.Step 5: Hit lighting bolt icon for “Tap” then drag to first artboard.Step 6: In second artboard, select “Top” and give it a 45° angle in Inspector.Step 7: Then give “Bottom” -45° (It’s a negative value!) angle.Step 8: Change opacity for “Middle” to 0% to make it disappear.Step 9: Center everything within “BoundingBox” and voilà! You should have a cross icon.Done!In Principle, grouping goes beyond layer organization. Groups can turn into scrollable content and they can also act as masks. Resizing a group no longer affects the size of the child elements. Imagine it as an invisible (and magical) rectangle.Exercise #2A: Make content scroll vertically (3 mins)Step 1: Group following layers: “Headline,” all three card groups and “Spacer”* (hotkey: cmd + g)Step 2: Select group and resize bounding box to fit artboardStep 3: In Inspector panel, select “Scroll” above “Vertical” in toolbarStep 4: Test drive in “Preview” window!Step 1: Group all card groups and “Spacer”.Step 2: Resize bounding box to fit width of artboardStep 3: In Inspector panel, select “Scroll” above “Horizontal” in toolbarKaboom!Step 1: Group all card layers from “Card-01” to “Card-05” and “Spacer” together.Step 2: In Inspector panel, select “Page” above “Horizontal” in toolbar.Step 3: Resize bounding box of group to area of repeating tile — which is t he width of the card, plus left and right margin. See screenshot below.The end!This is another trick you can do with groups in Principle — masking.Step 1: Select “ExpandableContent” group and check “Clip Sublayers” in Inspector. See below. Your group is now a mask.Step 2: Stay in Inspector, change height from 450 to 0. Your mask/group has been shrunken in order to hide the content.Step 3: Select icon group “Icon-Arrow-Down,” hit lightning bolt icon for “Tap” and drag to current artboard to make duplicate.Step 4: In the second artboard, select “ExpandableContent” (easier to do in the Layer List since there is no height to it), change height to 450 in Inspector. Now content should be visible again.Let’s turn the arrow upside down to indicate “close” action.Step 5: Select “Icon-Arrow-Down” in the second artboard and type in “180” above Angle in Inspector.Step 6: Now connect second artboard back to first one with “Icon-Arrow-Down” using “Tap” option.You did it!The second half of this quick and easy workshop will be posted this following week. Stay tuned. We will talk about Drivers and Components in Principle.Please leave a comment if you have any questions or feedback. Happy prototyping!Senior web designer at ClearlinkThe best collection of articles, tips, tutorials, and stories on designing and prototyping with Sketch and beyondThank you for this! I have done some other Principle tuts, but this one, with the animated gifs showing what you’re trying to accomplish, is super helpful. The masking thing was something I was trying to figure out, unsuccessfully. Now I can go back and clean up my messy test file!Thank you for reading my article! The masking thing was so trippy and it took me a second to understand what I can do with it.This file here really inspired me to use masking on a whole new level: http://principlerepo.com/nike-running-app/Hi nice article can u check my interactions I have uploaded them to dribble. Not to boast i wish I had found this article earlier. I had a hard time exploring principle and the naming of layers man so time consuming. I think the final transition results came out ok but could have been more refined. If my files were better named and prepared for…Sleek animation! I really enjoy the micro-animation you put into your prototype. Those details push the end result to the next level in my opinion. I feel you on the naming. I recommend flattening elements that you don’t plan on animating into JPGs to minimize the number of layers in the file.I do have plans to write something on preparing files for Principle. Stay tuned!Tried Principle for the very first time. Thanks for the wonderful introduction. The way principle creates transitions based on the changes is magical.It’s intuitive and seamless. I am blown away by how much time I save with Principle. Thanks for your support!Thanks! Really appreciate the effort.Thank you for reading! I just bookmarked your “The Design of Everyday Things” article. Can’t wait to dive in!Amazing read! Thanks! Is the second part of the article out? I can’t seem to find it.It’s been submitted for publication, currently being reviewed :)Awesome articles, can’t wait for the next one!Thank you! Let me know if you have any feedback or questions.The next article should be out very soon.Awesome.. Please do more like “Card Flip, etc” So we can learn.Do you mind sending me an example? I can add it to my next article or do a seperate tutorial. Thanks!principal is way more simple than after effects. the automatic keyframes is main strength of the software and for ui animations its worth to learn thank you really did a great job on this article it helps people to get into interaction design.Using AfterEffect feels like cutting steak with a chainsaw for what I do. Thank you for your support and glad I can share. :)Yes eagerly waiting for article on drivers because its driving me crazy!! :PYou are going to love the next article. It’s being reviewed but should be out of the oven really soon. After part 2, you should now be able to use Principle to show off your design and demonstrate the basic user journey from screen to screen. The basic. This last part of the crash course aims to expand your arsenal with two heavy hitters in Principle — drivers and components. Their purpose is to help you handle complex interactions (like parallax scrolling and this clever 3D card) and boost the authenticity of your prototype.Need a sticky (and stacking) header? Want elements to pop up when you scroll down? The Drivers panel dictates what happens when you scroll up and down, left and right. This feature is powerful. You are able to replicate many more interactions on the web and bring your design to life.First, I will teach you to read the Drivers panel. Once you click Drivers in the toolbar, you will see a pixel-based timeline. If there are any groups with scrolling enabled, you can drag the dark grey indicator along the timeline to see the scrolling in action.When elements are set to react according to scroll, you will see a blue line indicating a change in properties for these elements. Below are two examples:Step 1: Select “ScrollableContent” group and enable scrolling above “Vertical” in Inspector.Step 2: Open Drivers panel by clicking on the icon in toolbar.Step 3: Select “BG” in the layers panel and it should show up in the Drivers panel. Click on the blue diamond next to “BG.” Select “Fill” in the dropdown. This will tell Principle that the fill color of this layer should react to vertical scrolling of the “ScrollableContent” group.Step 4: Drag dark grey indicators to 518. This is the height of the content group.Step 5: In Inspector, change the fill color to white, or any color. A blue line indicating a change in fill color should appear.Step 6: Drag indicator back to 0, so this artboard shows the default position of the design.See it in action in the preview window!We will use file from Exercise #4A to continue building this design.Step 7: Make sure timeline indicator is back to position 0. Select “Content-01” and “Content-02” group.Step 8: Click on the blue diamond in Drivers to select “Opacity” option in the dropdown. Now Principle is ready to alter the opacity of the two groups when this page is scrolled.Step 9: Select “Content-02” group and change the opacity to 0%.Step 10: Select “Content-01.” In Drivers, push the indicator to the pixel point where you want the fade effect to start (I’ve chosen 250px for this example). Then click the blue diamond again next to Opacity. A keyframe is established. At this point, “Content-01” is still at 100%.Step 11: In Drivers, drag indicator to where you want “Content-01” to fully disappear (I’ve chosen 350px for this exercise). Change opacity to 0% and test in preview window.Step 12: Drag indicator to where you want “Content-02” to start fading in (I’ve chosen 400px). Opacity is still at 0%. Click the blue diamond to establish this keyframe.Step 13: At position 500, change opacity to 100%. Now “Content-02” should appear.Check it out in your preview window!Components in Principle allow you to create individual vacuums to isolate events or animation, keeping your workspace clutter-free. You can also import other Principle files into your current prototype as components.The featured title card for this article is a collection of imported Principle files placed within one master artboard.Besides the example above, here are a few more instances when you can use components :When you are able to isolate individual interactions as components within your prototype, maneuvering and editing become much easier tasks.There are two files for this exercise. We will open up “05…heart.prd” first. There are 3 hearts with different shades to represent default, hover, and active states.Step 1: Select the first artboard (“Default”) and click on the thunderbolt icon.Step 2: Drag from “Hover Inside” to the second artboard (“Hover”).Step 3: Select second artboard and use “Hover Outside” as the trigger to go back to first artboard. It should now show the hover state properly in preview window.Step 4: Select second artboard again and use “Tap” as the trigger to go to third artboard (“Active”).Step 5: Now do the same in the other direction. Activate “Tap” from third artboard to second. This is what your artboard should look like now :The “Favorite” button should function properly at this point. Save this file and now open “05…Page.prd.”Step 6: In Finder, drag your “05…heart.prd” into “05…Page.prd.” You should now see the heart in your artboard.Step 7: Duplicate the heart to place within each card group. Make sure the hearts are placed in the correct groups.Step 8: Select “ScrollableContent” and activate “Page” scrolling above “Horizontal”.Now we are going to make the pink/yellow button functional using Components and Drivers from previous exercise. Except this time, we are going to learn the other way to create a component.Step 9: Select “Button-left” and click on “Create component” in toolbar.Step 10: We are now inside a component. Let’s make the default state of the button slightly transparent until hovered on. Change opacity of “Button-left” to 50%.Step 11: Now click on the thunderbolt icon and drag “Hover inside” to itself to duplicate the content to a new artboard. Change the opacity of the second artboard to 100%.Step 12: Use “Hover outside” to connect second artboard back to the first one. This is what your workspace should look like:Step 13: Click on “Back to Instance” on the top left corner of your workspace to head back. Now repeat step 9–12 for “Button-right” group. I also encourage you to rename the two components to keep everything organized.Next, we are going to turn both buttons into real triggers in your prototype.Step 14: Select “Button-Right” component and use the thunderbolt icon for “tap”. Drag to itself to duplicate artboard.Step 15: Select second artboard and now open up Drivers panel.Step 16: With second artboard selected, drag the indicator in Drivers to position 240, where the third card is centered in the artboard:Step 17: Repeat step 16 to activate “button-left” in the first artboard. For this new duplicated artboard, you will go to the negative end of the timeline, position -250.Step 18: Test in preview window. Repeat using “Tap” to connect remaining artboards.Regardless of which card is centered, the buttons should lead to another animation. For example, the left button on the screen with the first card should bring you to the third card to create a loop, like this:Done!This is the end of my 3-part series on Prototyping with the Principle app. With the simplicity of the interface and powerful features, you can utilize Principle to replicate a wide spectrum of web/app interactions without touching a line of code or spending exhaustive hours to execute. I see Principle as a tool of communication when it comes to translating flat JPEGs of my design to a functioning prototype that everyone on my team can understand.I have a list of sites where you can download working Principle files to further your learning on this tool:Thank you for committing your time to learn a new tool with my crash course. Feel free to leave me a message with feedback or questions.Happy prototyping!Senior web designer at Clearlink
